Telemetry work (#617)
awslabs/aws-advanced-jdbc-wrapper: docs/using-the-jdbc-driver/Telemetry.md

# Monitoring

Monitoring is the ability of gathering data and insights of the execution of an application, then allowing users to inspect the gathered data and determine potential actions to take depending on the data collected.

> In version vX.Y.Z of the AWS JDBC Driver, we have introduced a Telemetry feature to the wrapper that enables users to collect and visualize data of the execution of the AWS JDBC Driver, at a global level and at plugin level, meaning that one can now inspect specific performance data for each plugin in the plugin chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In version X.Y.Z of the AWS JDBC Driver, we have introduced a Telemetry feature to the wrapper enabling users to collect and visualize data of the AWS JDBC Driver execution, at a global level and at plugin level, meaning that one can now inspect specific performance data for each plugin in the [plugin chain](../development-guide/Pipelines.md).
```

Reviewer: We never really explained what a plugin chain is in our documentation, not sure if it makes sense to mention it.

> In version vX.Y.Z of the AWS JDBC Driver, we have introduced a Telemetry feature to the wrapper that enables users to collect and visualize data of the execution of the AWS JDBC Driver, at a global level and at plugin level, meaning that one can now inspect specific performance data for each plugin in the plugin chain.

Reviewer 2: I believe we generally use the term "driver" instead of "wrapper" now?

> This enables you to monitor the performance of the driver with their configurations and determine whether that performance meets your expectation on the driver.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This enables you to monitor the performance of the driver with your configurations and determine whether the performance meets your expectations of the driver.
```

## Terminology

> The AWS JDBC Driver feature provides telemetry data through two different forms: **Traces** and **Metrics**.

Reviewer: Not sure if I understand what `The AWS JDBC Driver feature` refers to.

### Traces

> Traces give an overview of what is happening in a specific section of the execution of an application. A trace is composed by a hierarchical sequence of segments, each of which contain basic information about the execution (e.g., duration), and whether that section was executed successfully or not.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Traces give an overview of what is happening in a specific section of the execution of an application. A trace is composed of a hierarchical sequence of segments, each of which contains basic information about the execution (e.g., duration), and whether or not that section was executed successfully.
```
?

> In the AWS JDBC Driver, initially a trace will be generated for every JDBC call made to the wrapper. Depending on whether the user application has already a trace open, it might be either nested into it or dropped. And then, for each plugin that is part of the wrapper plugin chain, another segment will be created only for the plugin execution, linked to the JDBC call segment.

Reviewer: Maybe ` the new trace might be either nested into the opened trace or dropped.`

> In the AWS JDBC Driver, initially a trace will be generated for every JDBC call made to the wrapper. Depending on whether the user application has already a trace open, it might be either nested into it or dropped. And then, for each plugin that is part of the wrapper plugin chain, another segment will be created only for the plugin execution, linked to the JDBC call segment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the AWS JDBC Driver, initially a trace will be generated for every JDBC call made to the wrapper. Depending on whether the user application has already a trace open, the new trace might be either nested into the opened trace or dropped.. And then, for each plugin that is part of the wrapper plugin chain, another segment will be created only for the plugin execution, linked to the JDBC call segment.
```

> In the AWS JDBC Driver, initially a trace will be generated for every JDBC call made to the wrapper. Depending on whether the user application has already a trace open, it might be either nested into it or dropped. And then, for each plugin that is part of the wrapper plugin chain, another segment will be created only for the plugin execution, linked to the JDBC call segment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the AWS JDBC Driver, initially a trace will be generated for every JDBC call made to the driver. Depending on whether the user application already has a trace open, the new trace might either be nested into the opened trace or dropped. Then, for each plugin that is part of the wrapper plugin chain, another segment will be created only for the plugin execution, linked to the JDBC call segment.
```
Adding to Karen's suggestion

> Traces from the AWS JDBC Driver are submitted to **AWS X-Ray**. [link]

Reviewer: Link?

### Metrics

> Metrics are numeric data that were measured and collected through the execution of an application. Those metrics can give an insight on how many times some action (e.g., failover) has happened, and if that action succeeded or failed, and other related information.

Reviewer: Does it make sense to mention "and if that action succeeded or failed," when discussing metrics? Since we mentioned it is a numeric data?

Author: There are counters for failover success and failures, so that's what I had in mind when writing it. Might reword

> The AWS JDBC Driver will submit metrics data to **AWS Cloudwatch**.

Reviewer: Link to CloudWatch? The official name is Amazon CloudWatch not AWS Cloudwatch https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonCloudWatch/latest/monitoring/WhatIsCloudWatch.html

> The list of available metrics available for the AWS JDBC Driver and its plugins is available in the Appendix [link] section of this page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The list of available metrics for the AWS JDBC Driver and its plugins is available in the Appendix [link] section of this page.
```

## Setting up the Amazon OTEL Collector

> 

Reviewer 2: Can this part from line 37 be moved here? To give context on what the collector is/why you need it

```The AWS OTEL Collector is responsible for receiving telemetry data from the application using the AWS JDBC Driver and forwarding it to AWS.```

> ## Pre Requirements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites
```

Before enabling the Telemetry feature, a few setup steps are required to ensure the monitoring data gets properly emitted.

> 1. In order to visualize the telemetry data in the AWS Console, make sure you have an IAM user or role with permissions to AWS X-Ray and AWS Cloudwatch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In order to visualize the telemetry data in the AWS Console, make sure you have an IAM user or role with permissions to [AWS X-Ray](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/xray/latest/devguide/security-iam.html) and [Amazon CloudWatch](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonCloudWatch/latest/monitoring/auth-and-access-control-cw.html).
```

> 2. Download the AWS OTEL Collector and set it up. The AWS OTEL Collector is responsible from receiving telemetry data from the application using the AWS JDBC Driver and forward it to AWS. Both of those connections happen via HTTP, therefore URLs and ports need to be correctly configured for the collector.

Reviewer: Is it this one? https://github.com/aws-observability/aws-otel-collector, lets refer to it by `AWS Distro for OpenTelemetry Collector (ADOT Collector)`

WARNING: The AWS OTEL Collector can be set up either locally or remotely. It is up to the user to decide where is best to set it up. If you decide to host it remotely, ensure that the application has the necessary permissions or allowlists to connect to the Collector.

> WARNING: The collector is an external application that is not part of the wrapper itself. Without a collector, the wrapper will collect monitoring data from its execution but that data will not be sent anywhere for visualization.

Reviewer: I like these warnings, can we add `>` to make it stand out
```suggestion
> WARNING: The collector is an external application that is not part of the wrapper itself. Without a collector, the wrapper will collect monitoring data from its execution but that data will not be sent anywhere for visualization.
```

Reviewer: Thoughts on a warning emoji? 👀

## Using Telemetry

> Telemetry for the AWS JDBC Driver is a monitoring strategy that overlooks all plugins that are enabled in [`wrapperPlugins`](../UsingTheJdbcDriver.md#connection-plugin-manager-parameters) and is not a plugin in itself. Therefore no changes are required in the `wrapperPlugins` parameter to enable Telemetry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Telemetry for the AWS JDBC Driver is a monitoring strategy that overlooks all plugins that are enabled in [`wrapperPlugins`](../UsingTheJdbcDriver.md#connection-plugin-manager-parameters) and is not a plugin in itself. Therefore no changes are required in the `wrapperPlugins` parameter to enable Telemetry.
```
```suggestion
Telemetry for the AWS JDBC Driver is a monitoring strategy that overlooks all plugins enabled in [`wrapperPlugins`](../UsingTheJdbcDriver.md#connection-plugin-manager-parameters) and is not a plugin in itself. Therefore no changes are required in the `wrapperPlugins` parameter to enable Telemetry.
```

> In order to enable Telemetry in the AWS JDBC Driver all you need to do is to set the `enableTelemetry` property to `true` either in the code or in the connection URL.

Reviewer: Can we provide examples for both and for datasources ? So users can just copy pasta?

Reviewer: Nit: can we use connection string instead of connection URL

| `enableTelemetry` | Boolean | No | Telemetry will be enabled when this property is set to `true`, otherwise no telemetry data will be gathered during the execution of the wrapper. | `false` |

> | `telemetryTracesBackend` | String | No | Determines to which backend the gathered tracing data will be forwarded to.<br>`NONE` indicates that the application will collect tracing data but this data will not be forwarded anywhere.<br>`XRAY` indicates that the traces will be collected by the AWS XRay Daemon.<br>`OTLP` indicates that the traces will be collected by the AWS OTEL COllector. | `NONE` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `telemetryTracesBackend` | String | No | Determines to which backend the gathered tracing data will be forwarded to. Possible values include: `NONE`, `XRAY`, and `OTLP`. <br><br>`NONE` indicates that the application will collect tracing data but this data will not be forwarded anywhere.<br>`XRAY` indicates that the traces will be collected by the AWS XRay Daemon.<br>`OTLP` indicates that the traces will be collected by the AWS OTEL COllector. | `NONE` |
```

> | `telemetryMetricsBackend` | String | No | Determines to which backend the gathered metrics data will be forwarded to.<br>`NONE` indicates that the application will collect metrics data but this data will not be forwarded anywhere.<br>`OTLP` indicates that the metrics will be collected by the AWS OTEL COllector. | `NONE` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `telemetryMetricsBackend` | String | No | Determines to which backend the gathered metrics data will be forwarded to. Possible values include: `NONE`, and `OTLP`. <br><br>`NONE` indicates that the application will collect metrics data but this data will not be forwarded anywhere.<br>`OTLP` indicates that the metrics will be collected by the AWS OTEL COllector. | `NONE` |
```

> | `telemetrySubmitTopLevel` | String | No | Determines which nesting strategy to adopt for traces about top level traces and nested traces.<br><br>See the [Nested tracing strategies using Amazon XRay] section for more details about nesting strategies.<br><br>`ALWAYS_TOP_LEVEL` means that every JDBC call to the driver will generate a trace with no direct parent trace attached to it. If there is already an open trace being recorded by the application, no driver traces will be created.<br>`ALWAYS_NESTED` means that the wrapper will assume that there is an open trace in the application and the driver traces will all be attached to that open trace. If the user selects this value for the property and there is no open trace in the user application, no trace will be created.<br>`TOP_LEVEL` means that the application will look if there is an open trace in the users application prior to record telemetry data. If there is a current open trace, the traces created will be attached to that open trace. If not, all telemetry traces created will be top level.<br>`NO_TRACE` means that no traces will be created during the wrapper execution. | `TOP_LEVEL` |

Reviewer: Reminder to link the section

> | `telemetrySubmitTopLevel` | String | No | Determines which nesting strategy to adopt for traces about top level traces and nested traces.<br><br>See the [Nested tracing strategies using Amazon XRay] section for more details about nesting strategies.<br><br>`ALWAYS_TOP_LEVEL` means that every JDBC call to the driver will generate a trace with no direct parent trace attached to it. If there is already an open trace being recorded by the application, no driver traces will be created.<br>`ALWAYS_NESTED` means that the wrapper will assume that there is an open trace in the application and the driver traces will all be attached to that open trace. If the user selects this value for the property and there is no open trace in the user application, no trace will be created.<br>`TOP_LEVEL` means that the application will look if there is an open trace in the users application prior to record telemetry data. If there is a current open trace, the traces created will be attached to that open trace. If not, all telemetry traces created will be top level.<br>`NO_TRACE` means that no traces will be created during the wrapper execution. | `TOP_LEVEL` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `telemetrySubmitTopLevel` | String | No | Determines which nesting strategy to adopt for traces about top level traces and nested traces. Possible values include: `ALWAYS_TOP_LEVEL`, `ALWAYS_NESTED`, `TOP_LEVEL`, and `NO_TRACE`. <br><br>See the [Nested tracing strategies using Amazon XRay] section for more details about nesting strategies.<br><br>`ALWAYS_TOP_LEVEL` means that every JDBC call to the driver will generate a trace with no direct parent trace attached to it. If there is already an open trace being recorded by the application, no driver traces will be created.<br>`ALWAYS_NESTED` means that the wrapper will assume that there is an open trace in the application and the driver traces will all be attached to that open trace. If the user selects this value for the property and there is no open trace in the user application, no trace will be created.<br>`TOP_LEVEL` means that the application will look if there is an open trace in the users application prior to record telemetry data. If there is a current open trace, the traces created will be attached to that open trace. If not, all telemetry traces created will be top level.<br>`NO_TRACE` means that no traces will be created during the wrapper execution. | `TOP_LEVEL` |
```

## Nested tracing strategies using Amazon XRay

> As you could see in the previous section, the AWS JDBC Driver allows an user to determine which strategy for nested traces to use when using Telemetry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you could see in the [Telemetry Parameters](#Telemetry-Parameters) section, the AWS JDBC Driver allows an user to determine which strategy for nested traces to use when using Telemetry.
```

> Traces are hierarchical entities and it might be that the user application has already an open trace in a given sequence of code that connects to the AWS JDBC Driver. In this case, the Telemetry feature allows users to determine which strategy to use for the Telemetry traces generated when using the driver.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Traces are hierarchical entities and it might be that the user application already has an open trace in a given sequence of code that connects to the AWS JDBC Driver. In this case, the Telemetry feature allows users to determine which strategy to use for the Telemetry traces generated when using the driver.
```

A top level trace is a trace that has no link to any other parent trace, and is directly accessible from the list of submitted traces within XRay. When a trace is hierarchically linked to a parent trace, we say that this trace is nested. An example of nested traces are the individual plugin traces for a given JDBC call. All the individual plugin traces are linked to a parent trace for the JDBC call. Those nested traces are illustrated in picture 2.

[Picture 1: Picture of a top level trace]

[Picture 2: Picture of the plugin nested traces for a JDBC call]

> Applications that interact with the AWS JDBC Driver may or may not have already opened telemetry traces on their own. In this case, it is up to the user to determine how they want to mix both applications and driver traces.
> 
> The `telemetrySubmitTopLevel` property of the AWS JDBC Driver allows users to determine that. Within that property, users can choose to submit the driver traces always as top level traces, to submit them nested to the application traces, or even to not submit the driver traces at all.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Applications that interact with the AWS JDBC Driver may or may not have already opened telemetry traces on their own. In this case, it is up to the user to determine how they want to mix both application and driver traces.

This can be done using the AWS JDBC Driver's `telemetrySubmitTopLevel` property. This property allows users to choose to submit the driver traces always as top level traces, to submit them nested to the application traces, or even to not submit the driver traces at all.
```
?

> The property allows 4 different options to choose from:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `telemetrySubmitTopLevel` property allows 4 different options to choose from:
```
?

- `ALWAYS_TOP_LEVEL` means that all the driver traces should be all forced into being top level traces. If the application has already open traces, it will not be possible for the driver traces to be top level and the driver traces therefore will not be submitted.

> - `ALWAYS_NESTED` indicates that the user wants the driver traces to always be nested into their application traces. That will happen unless there are not open application traces when the driver is running, in that case no driver traces will be collected or submitted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `ALWAYS_NESTED` indicates that the user wants the driver traces to always be nested into their application traces. That will happen unless there are no open application traces when the driver is running. In that case, no driver traces will be collected or submitted.
```
?

>   -`TOP_LEVEL` is a strategy where driver traces are submitted as top level traces, unless there is already an application open trace. If there is already an open trace, the driver traces will identify it and be submitted as nested traces with the application trace as parent.

Reviewer: Indentation looks off here

- `NO_TRACE` indicates that no traces will be submitted to Amazon XRay.

## List of Metrics

> The AWS JDBC Driver also submits a set of metrics to Amazon Cloudwatch when the driver is executed. Those metrics are predefined and help giving insight of what is happening inside the plugins when they are executed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The AWS JDBC Driver also submits a set of metrics to Amazon Cloudwatch when the driver is used. These metrics are predefined and they help give insight on what is happening inside the plugins when the plugins are used.
```
?

### Metrics

Metrics are numeric data that were measured and collected through the execution of an application. Those metrics can give an insight on how many times some action (such as failover) has happened and succeeded or failure, and others.

The AWS JDBC Driver will submit metrics data to **AWS Cloudwatch**.

The list of available metrics available for the AWS JDBC Driver and its plugins is available in the Appendix [link] section of this page.

## Setting up the Amazon OTEL Collector

## Pre Requirements

Before enabling inside the application using the AWS JDBC Driver, a few setup steps are required to ensure the monitoring data gets properly emitted.

1. In order to visualize the telemetry data in the AWS Console, make sure you have an IAM user or role with permissions to AWS X-Ray and AWS Cloudwatch.

2. Download the AWS OTEL Collector and set it up. The AWS OTEL Collector is responsible from receiving telemetry data from the application using the AWS JDBC Driver and forward it to AWS. Both of those connections happen via HTTP, therefore URLs and ports need to be correctly configured for the collector.

> WARNING: The AWS OTEL Collector can be set up either locally either remotely. It is up to the user to decide where is best to set it up. If you decide to host it remotely, ensure that the application has the necessary permissions or whitelisting to connect to the Collector.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
WARNING: The AWS OTEL Collector can be set up either locally or remotely. It is up to the user to decide where is best to set it up. If you decide to host it remotely, ensure that the application has the necessary permissions or allowlists to connect to the Collector.
```

> WARNING: The collector is an external application that is not part of the wrapper itself. Without a collector, the wrapper will collect monitoring data from its execution but those will not be sent anywhere for visualization and get lost.

Reviewer 3: Removing lost since the data is still collected, it just doesn't go anywhere. Lost may add confusion since the data is not being sent elsewhere.

```suggestion
WARNING: The collector is an external application that is not part of the wrapper itself. Without a collector, the wrapper will collect monitoring data from its execution but that data will not be sent anywhere for visualization.
```

## Using Telemetry

Telemetry for the AWS JDBC Driver is a monitoring strategy that overlooks all plugins that are enabled in [`wrapperPlugins`](../UsingTheJdbcDriver.md#connection-plugin-manager-parameters) and is not a plugin in itself. Therefore no changes are required in the `wrapperPlugins` parameter to enable Telemetry.

> In order to enable Telemetry in the AWS JDBC Driver all you need to do is to set the `enableTelemetry` property to `true` either in the code either in the connection URL.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to enable Telemetry in the AWS JDBC Driver all you need to do is to set the `enableTelemetry` property to `true` either in the code or in the connection URL.
```
